CAIP-358: Introducing Transfer Types (#381)
ChainAgnostic/CAIPs: CAIPs/caip-358.md

- `paymentOptions` - this field **MUST** be an array of `PaymentOption` objects with at least one entry. Each element in the array represents a payment option the wallet may choose to complete the payment, each with independent parameters.

**Note:** Merchants **CAN** signal `PaymentOption` preference by ordering the paymentOptions array. JSON-RPC guarantees array order, but wallets are **NOT REQUIRED** to honor it. Wallets **MAY** offer swaps or bridges to help users match the merchant’s preferred option.

For `PaymentOption` parameters these are defined for `version=1` as:

- `asset` - this field **MUST** follow the assetId [CAIP-19][] spec which also includes the [CAIP-2][] chainId prefix.
- `amount` - this field **MUST** be a Hex string representing the amount in the smallest denomination of its asset.
- `recipient` - this field **MUST** be a chain-specific address present in the chain referred in the `asset` field.
- `types` - this field **MUST** be an array of strings defining different transfer authorization types.

> The exclusive list of Transfer Types supported in `version=1` are the following:

Reviewer: We could make this non-exclusive and extensible easily with a defined "private types" approach. Right now we're effectively locking this to the types of today rather than the types of what's possible.

A good example of what this might look like is: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519#section-4.3

Author: Honestly I would say that is the best long-term solution but historically in crypto we have seen this go very bad very quickly

The lack of governance where these "identifiers" can cause a lot of issues and this is very apparent on Ethereum with capabilities which is a melting pot of functionality that barely qualifies as a capability

In this scenario we are locking a narrow scope of accepted payment types that cover 95% of use-cases if not more

That being said this PR is still in Draft status so we can still make a follow-up PR to attempt a "private types" approach

#### Request

```typescript
// Accepted Payment Options
type PaymentOption = {
  asset: string;
  amount: string;
  recipient: string;
  types: string[];
};

// JSON-RPC Request Params
type RequestParams = {
  version: integer;
  orderId: string;
  expiry: number;
  paymentOptions: PaymentOption[];
};
```

The following request parameters are defined for `version=1` as:

> - `version` - this field is an integer and **MUST** be present to define which the following parameters are optional and required.

Author: ```suggestion
- `version` - this field is an integer and **MUST** be present to define which of the following parameters are optional and required.
```

> - `orderId` - this field **MUST** uniquely identify an order for which this payment request is linked to and **MUST NOT** be longer than 128 characters.

Reviewer 2: an order ~~for~~ which this payment request is linked to

> - `orderId` - this field **MUST** uniquely identify an order for which this payment request is linked to and **MUST NOT** be longer than 128 characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `orderId` - this field **MUST** uniquely identify an order for which this payment request is linked to and **MUST NOT** be longer than 128 characters. It does not require global uniqueness, but it's **RECOMMENDED** to use a UUIDv4 if global uniqueness is necessary.
```

> - `expiry` - this field **MUST**be a UNIX timestamp (in seconds) after which the payment request is considered expired and recommendeded to set for at least 5 mins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `expiry` - this field **MUST**be a UNIX timestamp (in seconds) after which the payment request is considered expired and **SHOULD** be set for at least 5 minutes.
```

- `paymentOptions` - this field **MUST** be an array of `PaymentOption` objects with at least one entry. Each element in the array represents a payment option that the wallet can choose from to complete the payment with independent parameters.

For `PaymentOption` parameters these are defined for `version=1` as:

- `asset` - this field **MUST** follow the assetId [CAIP-19][] spec which also includes the [CAIP-2][] chainId prefix.
- `amount` - this field **MUST** be a Hex string representing the amount in the smallest denomination of its asset.
- `recipient` - this field **MUST** be a chain-specific address present in the chain referred in the `asset` field.
- `types` - this field **MUST** be an array of strings defining different transfer authorization types.

Transfer Authorization types:

> - `native-transfer` - this is used when a native token is being used as a PUSH payment (eg. ETH, SOL).

Author: That's a good point! What do you think of this?

```
* A PUSH payment would be when the wallet user is the sender of the transaction onchain to settle the token transfer.
* A PULL payment would be when the recipient or a third-party is the sender of the transaction onchain to settle the token transfer.
```

> - `native-transfer` - this is used when a native token is being used as a PUSH payment (eg. ETH, SOL).

Reviewer 2: Yes, I like that

- `erc20-transfer` - this is used when an [ERC-20][] transfer is being used as a PUSH payment.
- `erc20-approve` - this is used when an [ERC-20][] allowance is approaved to be used as a PULL payment.
- `erc2612-permit` - this is used when a [ERC-2612][] permit message is being used as a PULL payment.
- `erc3009-authorization` - this is used when a [ERC-3009][] authorization message is being used as a PULL payment.
- `spl-transfer` - this is used when a [SPL][] transfer is being used as a PUSH payment.

> - `spl-approve` - this is used when a [SPL][] delegation is being used as a PULL payment.

Author: From my POV we should make it exclusive initially

> - `spl-approve` - this is used when a [SPL][] delegation is being used as a PULL payment.

Author: ```suggestion
- `spl-approve` - this is used when a [SPL][] delegation is being used as a PULL payment.

*NOTE:*
- A PUSH payment would be when the wallet user is the sender of the transaction onchain to settle the token transfer.
- A PULL payment would be when the recipient or a third-party is the sender of the transaction onchain to settle the token transfer.

```

    },
    {
      // 0.5 SOL on Solana Mainnet
      "asset": "solana:4sGjMW1sUnHzSxGspuhpqLDx6wiyjNtZ/slip44:501",
      "amount": "0x1DCD6500",
      "recipient": "9WzDXwBbmkg8ZTbNMqUxvQRAyrZzDsGYdLVL9zYtAWWM",
      "types": ["native-transfer"]
    },
    {
      // 100 USDC on Solana Mainnet
      "asset": "solana:4sGjMW1sUnHzSxGspuhpqLDx6wiyjNtZ/spl:EPjFWdd5AufqSSqeM2qN1xzybapC8G4wEGGkZwyTDt1v",
      "amount": "0x5F5E100",
      "recipient": "9WzDXwBbmkg8ZTbNMqUxvQRAyrZzDsGYdLVL9zYtAWWM",
      "types": ["spl-transfer"]
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Response

```typescript
// Transfer Receipt Payload
type TransferReceipt = {
  type: string;
  hash: string;
  data: {
    from: string;
    to: string;
    value: string;
    nbf?: integer;
    exp?: integer;
    nonce?: string;
  };
};

// JSON-RPC Response Result
type ResponseResult = {
  version: string;
  orderId: string;
  payment: PaymentOption;
  receipt: TransferReceipt;
};
```

The following response parameters are defined for `version=1` as:

- `version` - this field is an integer and **MUST** match the same one as the request.
- `orderId` - this field is a string and **MUST** match the same one as the request.

> - `payment` - this field is a `PaymentOption` object and describes which option was used to fulfill this request and **MUST** match one of the available ones in the request.

Author: ```suggestion
- `payment` - this field is a `PaymentOption` object and describes which option was used to fulfill this request and **MUST** match one of the provided options in the request.
```

    "hash": "0x8a8c3e0b1b812182db4cabd81c9d6de78e549fa3bf3d505d6e1a2b25a15789ed",
    "data": {
      "from": "0xab16a96D359eC26a11e2C2b3d8f8B8942d5Bfcdb",
      "to": "0x71C7656EC7ab88b098defB751B7401B5f6d8976F",
      "value": "0x56BC75E2D63100000",
    }
  },
}

// Response (type="erc3009-authorization")
// [hash = signature]

{
  "version": 1,
  "orderId": "643f31f2-67cd-4172-83cf-3176e8443ab8",
  "payment": {
    "asset": "eip155:1/erc20:0xA0b86991c6218b36c1d19D4a2e9Eb0cE3606eB48",
    "amount": "0x5F5E100",
    "recipient": "0x71C7656EC7ab88b098defB751B7401B5f6d8976F",
    "types": ["erc3009-authorization"]
  },
  "receipt": {
    "type": "erc3009-authorization",
    "hash": "0x8f3d1a72c9e54b60a7f2d98e41b3c75a9d04f68e2c71b95f3a0e6d2b4c89f17a5b3e90c47d61f2a8e9c5b4d73a1e06f298d3b57c40f9e1a62b84d5c7f03a9b6e81d24f5b70a39c8e4d26f1a05b7c9d3e8f42a",
    "data": {
      "from": "0xab16a96D359eC26a11e2C2b3d8f8B8942d5Bfcdb",
      "to": "0x71C7656EC7ab88b098defB751B7401B5f6d8976F",
      "value": "0x5F5E100",
      "nbf": 1740672089,
      "exp": 1740672389,
      "nonce": "0xb543b4324bc37877595306a83422e70903589eb3079a0003871b5fb0a545bd8d"
    }
  },
}
```

#### Idempotency

> The `wallet_pay` method **MUST** be idempotent for the same `orderId` as his ensures robustness in case of connection failures or timeout scenarios:

Reviewer 2: as **t**his ensures

- If a payment with the same `orderId` has already been completed successfully, the wallet **MUST** return the original `PayResult` without executing a new payment
- If a payment with the same `orderId` is currently pending, the wallet **SHOULD** return the result of the original payment attempt
- If a payment with the same `orderId` has failed previously, the wallet **MAY** attempt the payment again or return the previous error
- Wallets **SHOULD** maintain payment status for completed transactions for at least 24 hours after completion

> - If connection is lost during payment execution, dapps **MAY** retry the same request to query the payment status

Author: ```suggestion
- If the connection is lost during payment execution, dapps **MAY** retry the same request to query the payment status
```

### Wallet Address Sharing

Wallet addresses were intentionally omitted both for UX simplicity and to improve privacy.

By not requiring the user’s wallet address, this API can be implemented without first requesting a cross-origin identifier that could link a user’s activity across sites. Since the wallet address is not needed, the wallet may determine which address to use for the payment.

This design also supports use cases where payments originate from an address different from the user's primary account such as sponsored transactions, delegated or session-based accounts, or orchestration flows where the user controls multiple accounts.

Relying on payment requests rather than fixed wallet addresses provides greater flexibility and future-proofing. Wallets may automatically choose the appropriate token or address, or allow the user to override defaults when multiple options are available.

### Transaction Privacy

Wallets are encouraged to use transaction-privacy protocols to avoid exposing payment behavior on-chain.

A complete privacy protocol prevents manual or automated analysis (e.g., via block explorers) from identifying either the sender or recipient.

> Sender privacy protects users from having their purchase history used to build behavioral profiles, while recipient (e.g., merchant) privacy prevents real-time business data from being revealed as “business intelligence.

Reviewer 2: Missing a " at the end of this sentence.
